---
layout: page
title: Software
permalink: /software/
---

## Applets that I use in teaching ##

Developing these applets helped me understand concepts, and I hope they are useful to you as well.

### Phylogenetics ###

* [Pagel's lambda, delta, and kappa](/applets/pagel/)
* [Ornstein-Uhlenbeck vs. Brownian Motion](/applets/ou/)
* [Dirichlet base frequency distribution](/applets/dirichlet-prior/)

### Statistics ###

* [MCMC](/applets/mcmc-robot/)
* [Dirichlet Process Prior](/applets/dpp/)

### Natural Selection ###

* [Natural selection ball-drop game](/applets/ball-drop/)
* [Biston betularia (1848-1898)](/applets/biston-early/)
* [Biston betularia (1959-2003)](/applets/biston-late/)

### Population Genetics ###

* [Selfing](/applets/selfing/)
* [Fst](/applets/fst/)

## C++ Bayesian phylogenetics software tutorial

This is a tutorial showing how to create a functioning Bayesian
phylogenetics application in C++. It makes use of the BeagleLib library 
for computing likelihoods, and illustrates how to implement data partitioning, 
heated chains, rate heterogeneity, codon models, polytomy-friendly tree topology priors,
and steppingstone marginal likelihood estimation. 

* [C++ tutorial (version 3)](https://stromtutorial.github.io/)

## MCMC Robot

This is a free app for iPad/iPhone that illustrates the basic principles
of Markov chain Monte Carlo using the metaphor of a robot following
simple rules to walk around on a landscape and, in the process, learning
about the topography of the landscape. For the iOS version, P. Lewis
acknowledges the support provided by NSF grant DEB-1036448 (GrAToL).

A [D3 javascript](http://d3js.org/) version of MCMC Robot that can be run inside any modern
web browser is also available ([MCMC Robot](/applets/mcmc-robot/)).

Note: an older Windows version of this app is available below or from
the MCMC Robot home page.

## Galax

Program that estimates topological information content
from a tree file (or list of tree files) representing a sample from the
posterior distribution generated by a Bayesian phylogenetic analysis.
The analysis performed by Galax is described in the following
manuscript:

Lewis, P. O., M.-H. Chen, L. Kuo, L. A. Lewis, K. Fučíková, S. Neupane,
Y.-B. Wang, and D. Shi. 2016. [Estimating Bayesian phylogenetic
information content](https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syw042). Systematic
Biology 65(6):1009-1023.

Important! The methods outlined in the above paper and implemented in
the Galax software are most useful for problems involving fewer than 12
taxa. Please give Table 2 in the paper your full attention before using
the software on your own data, especially if you suspect information
content is low. We are working on a more general solution that will more
accurately measure information content.

Download Galax v1.0.0

* [MacOS 10.15 (Catalina) gzipped tar file](http://hydrodictyon.eeb.uconn.edu/people/plewis/downloads/galax/mac/galax-1.1.0-mac.tar.gz)
* [Windows 10 zip file](http://hydrodictyon.eeb.uconn.edu/people/plewis/downloads/galax/win/galax-1.1.0-win.zip)
* [GitHub site (for C++ source files)](https://github.com/plewis/galax)

## GDA

Program by Paul O. Lewis and Dmitri Zaykin designed to accompany the
book “Genetic Data Analysis” by Bruce S. Weir (1996, Sinaur Associates).
Computes linkage and Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium, some genetic
distances, and provides method-of-moments estimators for hierarchical
F-statistics.

* [Windows zip file](http://hydrodictyon.eeb.uconn.edu/people/plewis/downloads/gda-1.1.win32.zip)

Reference:

Weir, B. S. 1996. [Genetic Data Analysis.](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/genetic-data-analysis-ii-9780878939022) 2nd ed. Sinauer Associates,
Sunderland, Massachusetts. 376 pages.

